docs: Added tutorials on writing a sink (#16070)
vectordotdev/vector: docs/tutorials/sinks/2_http_sink.md

Most Vector sinks involve some form of network connectivity. Connecting to a network
requires more involved functionality that we have covered so far in our basic sink.
This tutorial will modify our sink to send the events to an HTTP endpoint. We will 

> cover a number of Vector components that make adding this functionality easy.

Author: That's a tough one. Framework components?

> cover a number of Vector components that make adding this functionality easy.

Reviewer: 😄  yes it is. 
Framework components works for me 👍

> # imports

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Imports
```

        docs::examples = "http://example.com/endpoint/",
    ))]
    pub endpoint: String,
```

Every field in the configuration struct must have a comment. This is used to 
generate documentation for the Sink. The metadata attribute added here is used
to generate examples for the documentation. (This is possible because the config
struct is annotated with `#[configurable_component(sink("basic"))]`).

We then want to update our sink to take the endpoint from the config. At the same 
time let's create an `HttpClient` that will handle sending the data. `HttpClient` 
is our wrapper over [`hyper`][hyper_docs] used to send data over http.

Update the `BasicSink` struct to look like: 

```rust
#[derive(Debug, Clone)]
struct BasicSink {
    endpoint: String,
    client: HttpClient,
}

impl BasicSink {
    pub fn new(config: &BasicConfig) -> Self {
        let tls = TlsSettings::from_options(&None).unwrap();
        let client = HttpClient::new(tls, &Default::default()).unwrap();
        let endpoint = config.endpoint.clone();

        Self { client, endpoint }
    }
}
```

# Encoder

Now we want to create an Encoder that will take our event and convert it 

> to raw bytes.

Author: It would be good to generate some rust docs. A lot of the stuff here could link to those.

> to raw bytes.

Reviewer: :nods: I like the rust docs idea

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct BasicEncoder;
```

The Encoder must implement the `Encoder` trait:

```rust
impl Encoder<Event> for BasicEncoder {
    fn encode_input(
        &self,
        input: Event,
        writer: &mut dyn std::io::Write,
    ) -> std::io::Result<usize> {
    }
}
```

The `Encoder` trait is generic over the type of input that we are 
expecting. In our case it is `Event` since we will be encoding a single
event at a time. Other Sinks may encode a `Vec<Event>`  if they are 
sending batches of events, or they may send a completely different type
if each event is processed in someway prior to encoding.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The `encode_input` serializes the event to a String and writes these
bytes:
 
```rust
    fn encode_input(
        &self,
        input: Event,
        writer: &mut dyn std::io::Write,
    ) -> std::io::Result<usize> {
        let event = serde_json::to_string(&input).unwrap();
        write_all(writer, 1, event.as_bytes()).map(|()| event.len())
    }
```

# Request Builder

> Next we creata request builder that turns the event into a request. The 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next we creat a request builder that turns the event into a request. The 
```

> request is used by a Tower service that is responsible for actually sending

Reviewer 2: Worth linking out to Tower for those unfamiliar - probably just the first place it's mentioned (not sure if that's here).

Reviewer: I'd also suggest mentioning that generally the tower service is part of sink infrastructure code that doesn't need to be altered when adding new sinks, and is there to make adding new sinks easier.

Author: > I'd also suggest mentioning that generally the tower service is part of sink infrastructure code that doesn't need to be altered when adding new sinks, and is there to make adding new sinks easier.

Not sure I understand what you mean?

Reviewer: I think reading this I was reading it as a description of the tower infrastructure and not the service that we write as part of the tutorial. not sure if it's worth clarifying or explaining the sink service infrastructure 🤷 

Feel free to drop :dont mind me:

> request is used by a Tower service that is responsible for actually sending

Reviewer: I feel like this section could be filled in with a few more details. Like it turns the event into a request, but what is the purpose of the request, why is this step necessary.
Is it always an HTTP request? Or can it be other type of request.

> the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data to the sink's final destination external to Vector, in this case the HTTP endpoint.
```

The request looks like:

```rust
#[derive(Clone)]
struct BasicRequest {
    payload: Bytes,
    finalizers: EventFinalizers,
    metadata: RequestMetadata,
}
```

> The fields in the request are:

Reviewer: Are all of these fields necessary? I think they are.

```suggestion
The required fields in the request are:
```

Author: There's nothing that strictly requires them, it's just the data that our tower service will need in order to send the data out.. The fields are there because they are useful, not because they are mandatory.

## payload

The payload is the actual bytes that we will be sending out. These are the bytes
generated by our `BasicEncoder`.

## finalizers

`EventFinalizers` is a collection of `Finalizers`. A `Finalizer` is used to track 
the status of a given event and is used to support 
[end to end acknowledgements](https://vector.dev/docs/about/under-the-hood/guarantees/#acknowledgement-guarantees).

## metadata

The metadata contains additional data that is used to emit various metrics when 
a request is successfully sent.

> We need to implement a number of traits for the request to access these fields:

Reviewer: I'm thinking this could be organized differently. Perhaps instead of headers for each field, a header for "fields" and a header for "traits" ? Then lists?
Just seems a bit choppy as is. Could also see each of the traits going to their respective section, Request builder, finalizers and metadata. And just not having a separate section for traits.

```rust
impl MetaDescriptive for BasicRequest {
    fn get_metadata(&self) -> RequestMetadata {
        self.metadata
    }
}

impl Finalizable for BasicRequest {
    fn take_finalizers(&mut self) -> EventFinalizers {
        self.finalizers.take_finalizers()
    }
}
```

The request builder must implement the `RequestBuilder<>` trait: 

```rust
impl RequestBuilder<Event> for BasicRequestBuilder {
```

> There are a number of stages in the request builder process -  first the input 

Reviewer: perhaps these stages could be listed out? I think seeing lists whether numbered or not, helps break up tutorials and add clarity to steps.

> There are a number of stages in the request builder process -  first the input 
> is split out into metadata and actual event data. The event data is encoded. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are a number of stages in the request builder process. First the input 
is split out into metadata and actual event data, then the event data is encoded. 
```

The short last sentence seemed awkward - don't think my suggestion is perfect, but feels a better direction.

The results from the encoding are are passed with the metadata to create the 

> final request that is passed to the `Tower` sink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
final request that is passed to the `Tower` service.
```

Here, the trait is generic over `Event` which is the input type that is 
passed in to start the request building process.

There are a number of associated types:

```rust
    type Metadata = EventFinalizers;
    type Events = Event;
    type Encoder = BasicEncoder;
    type Payload = Bytes;
    type Request = BasicRequest;
    type Error = std::io::Error;
```

## Metadata

`Metadata` is the type for any information to be passed while building the request
that is additional to the actual event being used. In this case we just need the
`EventFinalizers`.

## Events

Events contains the type that is the event type passed to the `Encoder`.

## Encoder

The `Encoder` is the type that is used to encode the event to create the final
payload. We are using the `BasicEncoder` described earlier.

## Payload

The `Payload` is the type of the final data that is encoded.

## Request

`Request` is the type that is sent to the final service. This is the `BasicRequest`
we described earlier.

> ## Error

Reviewer: Similarly here, it feels to me like this would be easier to read as a list.

`Error` is the type of any errors that are creating while encoding the event.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The following functions for the `RequestBuilder` trait need implementing:

> ## compression

Reviewer: The transition from the prior section to this one is jarring.
The sentence on line 235 appears to be part of the Error section.

```rust
    fn compression(&self) -> Compression {
        Compression::None
    }
```

The payload for the built request can be compressed. Here we return `Compression::None`
to indicate that we will not be compressing. `Compression::Gzip` and `Compression::Zlib`

> are available choices.

Reviewer: Guideline on when it would be needed?

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## encoder

```rust
    fn encoder(&self) -> &Self::Encoder {
        &self.encoder
    }
```

We return the encoder to use. This is the `BasicEncoder` defined earlier.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## split_input

```rust
    fn split_input(
        &self,
        mut input: Event,
    ) -> (Self::Metadata, RequestMetadataBuilder, Self::Events) {
        let finalizers = input.take_finalizers();
        let metadata_builder = RequestMetadataBuilder::from_events(&input);
        (finalizers, metadata_builder, input)
    }
```

`split_input` takes the input and extracts the metadata from the events. In this
case we are returning the `input` parameter unprocessed. 

This may not always be the case. For example, the `amqp` sink will initially

> process  the event to extract fields to be used to calculate the exchange

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process  the event to extract fields to be used to calculate the amqp exchange
```

? just to be clear for uninitiated that we're not talking about some kind of "vector exchange".

> to send the message  to. This is sent  with the event to `split_input`.

Reviewer: What is sent, the exchange?

```suggestion
to send the message  to. The exchange is bundled with the event to `split_input`.
```

> This may not always be the case. For example, the `amqp` sink will initially
> process  the event to extract fields to be used to calculate the exchange
> to send the message  to. This is sent  with the event to `split_input`.
> `split_input` splits that out into the event for  encoding and the metadata
> containing the exchange which will be used when sending  the event to `amqp`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This may not always be the case. For example, the `amqp` sink will initially
process the event to extract fields to be used to calculate the exchange
to send the message to. This is sent with the event to `split_input`.
`split_input` splits that out into the event for encoding and the metadata
containing the exchange which will be used when sending the event to `amqp`.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## build_request

```rust
    fn build_request(
        &self,
        metadata: Self::Metadata,
        request_metadata: RequestMetadata,
        payload: EncodeResult<Self::Payload>,
    ) -> Self::Request {
        BasicRequest {
            finalizers: metadata,
            payload: payload.into_payload(),
            metadata: request_metadata,
        }
    }
```

`build_request` is used to build the final request that will contain the encoded
payload and the metadata. The `BasicRequest` object we return here is passed to 
our `Tower` service where the data is actually sent.

# Service

We need to create a service that is responsible for actually sending our final
encoded data.

> 

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that this is leveraging the aforementioned `Tower` service infrastructure, to tie it together.

```rust
struct BasicService {
    endpoint: String,
    client: HttpClient,
}
```

The two fields the service contains, `endpoint` and `client` are the `endpoint`
and `client` passed in from the `BasicSink` described earlier.

`BasicService` implements the `tower::Service` trait:

```rust
impl tower::Service<BasicRequest> for BasicService {
}
```
    
A number of associated types need defining:

```rust        
    type Response = BasicResponse;
    type Error = &'static str;
    type Future = BoxFuture<'static, Result<Self::Response, Self::Error>>;
```
    
## poll_ready

> `poll_ready` is used to indicate when the service is ready to send data. This service

Reviewer: perhaps mention that the tower service framework calls this function

Author: These are called by the [`Driver`](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/master/lib/vector-core/src/stream/driver.rs#L134-L187) in `vector-core`.

Reviewer: Sorry, was typing that up too fast. The stream driver is what I was referring to 👍

> has no reason to block, so we always return `Poll::Ready`.

Reviewer: When might a service have reason to block?

Author: I'll link to the Tower docs so they can read about it there.

```rust
    fn poll_ready(
        &mut self,
        _cx: &mut std::task::Context<'_>,
    ) -> std::task::Poll<Result<(), Self::Error>> {
        Poll::Ready(Ok(()))
    }
```

## call

> `call` is where the data is actually sent over http. It returns a future that will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`call` is where the data is actually sent over HTTP. It returns a future that will
```

> be invoked to send the actual data.

Reviewer: similarly, that this is called by the tower service infrastructure.

Author: These are called by the [`Driver`](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/master/lib/vector-core/src/stream/driver.rs#L134-L187) in `vector-core`.

        let byte_size = request.payload.len();
        let body = hyper::Body::from(request.payload);
        let req = http::Request::post(&self.endpoint)
            .header("Content-Type", "application/json")
            .body(body)
            .unwrap();

        let mut client = self.client.clone();

        Box::pin(async move {
            match client.call(req).await {
                Ok(response) => {
                    if response.status().is_success() {
                        Ok(BasicResponse { byte_size })
                    } else {
                        Err("received error response")
                    }
                }
                Err(_error) => Err("oops"),
            }
        })
    }
```

That future returns `BasicResponse`.

# BasicResponse

The return from our service must be an object that implements the `DriverResponse` trait.

```rust
struct BasicResponse {
    byte_size: usize,
}

impl DriverResponse for BasicResponse {
    fn event_status(&self) -> EventStatus {
        EventStatus::Delivered
    }

    fn events_sent(&self) -> CountByteSize {
        // (events count, byte size)
        CountByteSize(1, self.byte_size)
    }
}
```

> Vector calls the methods in this trait to determine if the event was delivered successfully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Tower` service infrastructure calls the methods in this trait to determine if the event was delivered successfully.
```

Author: These are called by the [`Driver`](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/master/lib/vector-core/src/stream/driver.rs#L134-L187) in `vector-core`.

> This is used for metrics and the end to end acknowledgements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is used to emit internal metrics and satisfy end to end acknowledgements.
```

                    encoder: BasicEncoder,
                },
            )
            .filter_map(|request| async move {
                match request {
                    Err(error) => {
                        emit!(SinkRequestBuildError { error });
                        None
                    }
                    Ok(req) => Some(req),
                }
            })
            .into_driver(service);

        sink.run().await
    }
```

After creating our service, we run a number of custom extension methods on `BoxStream` that 
process the stream of events.

## request_builder

`request_builder` indicates which request builder to use to build our request. We pass in 
the `BasicRequestBuilder` described earlier. The first parameter is the limit to the number
of concurrent request builders that should be in operation at any time. We pass `None` which
means no limit is applied.

## filter_map

If building the request errors, we want to emit an error and then filter the event from being 
processed further. 

## into_driver

The Driver is the final stage of the process that drives the interaction between the stream
of incoming events and the `BasicService` we created above.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: If we add a section on talking about unit tests in basic sink tutorial, perhaps we could mention integration tests in this one ?

Author: Testing is fully it's own section.

# Running our sink

We can now run our new sink.

> Let's run a test Http server to accept the responses our sink sends:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's run a test HTTP server to accept the responses our sink sends:
```

```sh
docker run -p 3000:3000 plork/httpdump
```

Our sink has a new configuration field for the endpoint. Update it to look like:

```yaml
sinks:
  basic:
    type: basic
    endpoint: http://localhost:3000
    inputs:
      - stdin
```

Then run Vector:

```sh
cargo run -- -c ./basic.yml
```

> If we type something into the console, this should now be sent to our Http server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we type something into the console, this should now be sent to our HTTP server:
```

# Configuration

First we want to update our config to allow an endpoint to be specified. Add
this field to the `BasicConfig` struct:

```rust

>     /// The endpoint to send HTTP traffic to.

Reviewer: Borderline troll nit but , should we make this doc comment as descriptive as the ones we have been doing in our auto gen docs effort, specifying that its a full URI and expects an http/https scheme ?

Just to hopefully inspire the readers to have such details in their new sinks.

Author: We definitely should!

Then run Vector:

```sh

> vdev run ./basic.yml

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cargo vdev run ./basic.yml
```
